JSIV Viewport

The Viewport will be responsible for displaying the image at the appropriate
offset and zoom level.  It will be a JPanel and will take care of the
image file loading, keeping track of where the image is displayed, the limits
of panning and zooming, etc.

Viewport will:
    Process raw mouse input
        Pan operations (RMB clicks, RMB drags, Scroll, Shift-Scroll)
        Zoom operations (Ctrl-Scroll)
        Open Next (LMB click on right side of Viewport)
        Open Previous (LMB click on left side of Viewport)
    Accept requests from the Program Window (Controller)
        Pan operations (Arrow Keys, Menu->Image->Center Image)
        Zoom operations (Ctrl-'+', Ctrl-'-', Menu->Image->Zoom In,
                         Menu->Image->Zoom Out, Menu->Image->Reset Zoom)
        Open File (Menu->File->Open)
        Open Next (Menu->File->Next)
        Open Previous (Menu->File->Previous)

Actions:

    Pan
    Zoom
    Open Files
    
---

Pan

Moving the image around in the window.  This will be controlled with an
offset.  If the Viewport pans down, the image will appear to move up (like
scrolling down on a webpage).  

So when the user presses an arrow key or drags with RMB, they will drag the
Viewport, but the Viewport will move in the opposite direction so the user
can feel like they are dragging the image.

When the user RMB clicks to re-center, or uses Menu->Image->Center Image,
that is also a pan operation, but it takes a specific point and calculates
how much to adjust the offset so that point moves to the center of the
Viewport.

Panning will also have limits to prevent the image from ever fulling going
outside of the bounds of the Program Window.  This limiting behavior will
have two possibilities, applied to each axis independantly (so horizontal
may use one limit while vertical uses the other limit if the image is 
tall and thin or short and wide).
1) If the image fits completely within the Viewport:

    image.size < Viewport.size
    
Then we will allow the image to pan until 1/2 the image is out of frame.
This will keep at least 1/2 of the image visible at all times, and should
allow the user to drag the left side of their image to at least the
middle of the Viewport.
2) If the image is larger than the Viewport for that axis:

    image.size >= Viewport.size
    
Then we will allow the edge of the image to go to the half-way point of 
the Viewport toward the opposite side.  i.e. Left edge of image can be
panned right until it hits about center.

---

Zoom

Zooming in and out of the image to make the pixels appear larger and smaller.
Zooming in makes the pixels look larger, but less pixels can be seen at a time.
Zooming out makes the pixels smaller so more cna be seen at a time.

We will allow zooming in as far as 64x or 128x (where that number defines how
many pixels high and wide each individual pixel in the image will be displayed
as.  Zoomed in to 8x, each pixel will be displayed as a 8px x 8px square.
There will be no smoothing, pixels will be square and easy to reason about.

We will allow zooming out beyond 1x zoom (where each pixel in the image is
a single pixel on screen).  This will cause pixels to disappear as the image
gets smaller than the screen pixels can display it.  This can be useful for
looking at a large image that is too big to fit on screen. 

We will constrain the zoom based on both the image size and the size of the
Viewport.  
    Highest zoom will be when you cannot see more than 8 pixels on an axis
    in the current Viewport.  Enlarging the Viewport (by making the
    Program Window larger) might allow you to zoom further in.
    
    Lowest zoom will be when you can see the full image in the Viewport with
    a little room on the sides.  Reducing the size of the Viewport (by making
    the Program Window smaller) will allow you to zoom further out.

When zooming, there will be a focus point for the zoom operation.  If keyboard
or Menu operations are used, that focus point will be the center of the
Viewport (if an axis has an even number of pixels, then it will be the pixel
to the left or above center).  If using the Scroll Wheel, the pixel under the
mouse pointer will be the focus.

The focus point pixel will, after the zoom operation, remain at the focus point.
This will make the image appear to zoom in or out centered on the mouse pointer.
If you zoom in with the pointer in the top-left corner, the majority of the
image will enlarge to the right and bottom.  Zoom out in that spot and the
bottom and right will seem to be the majority of the shrinkage.  The pixels
under the pointer will remain under the pointer after the zoom.  (or center
pixel will remain at center when keyboard or menu zoom is used)

---

Open Files

The Viewport will know how to open files in order to display them, and will
know how to read files in a given directory so it knows how to select the
"Next" and "Previous" images to open.

When opening a file, the existing file is dereferenced so it can be garbage
collected.

When a file opens, by default we will calculate how much zoom is needed for
the image to appear as large as possible in the Viewport without any of the
image going out of frame.  For small, icon sized images and a decently large
Viewport, this will result in being zoomed in, maybe to 4x or 8x, or larger.
For large images, this may result in being zoomed out to where some pixels
are hidden due to the compression of pixels that happens when you shrink
the image.

If there is a problem loading the new image, we will take one of two paths:

- If we used the File->Open request, we will pop up an error dialog to let
    the user know that the file they requested is invalid (and why if we can).
- If we used Open Next or Open Previous, we will simply skip the file that
    could not be opened and navigate to the next one in the appropriate
    direction.  We will repeat this until we get to a file that we can open.
    
Using this scheme, we will not be able to traverse the directory for images
unless we are able to open at least one image successfully.  If there are 3 
images and two of them are bad, when we open one and try to open next, we
will fail on the next two and return to the one that did open.

In that case, we will keep track of the files, so if the open file is the
only "valid" image file in the directory when the user tries to Open Next
or Open Previous, we will pop up a dialog to alert the user that there are
no other images that we can open, and then we won't re-open the image
already in the viewer.