JSIV user manual

-
1. Quick Ref
2. What is this program?
3. How to use this program
3.1 Open a file
3.2 Navigate to other files
3.2.1 Navigate to Previous/Next image
3.2.2 Navigation issues
3.2.2.1 Only one file in the folder
3.2.2.2 No valid image to display
3.2.2.3 Image will not open or was removed
3.2.2.4 Current image is removed
3.2.2.5 Refreshing the internal file list
3.3 Image magnification
3.3.1 Zoom In
3.3.2 Zoom Out
3.3.3 Reset Magnification
3.4 Pan
3.4.1 Drag
3.4.2 Click
3.4.3 Center
3.5 Background
3.6 Color picker
4. Menu
5. Viewport
6. Status bar
7. About

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

1. Quick Reference

Left Mouse Button   Drag - Pan image
                    Click - Navigate Previous/Next when buttons available
                    Ctrl-Click - Center pixel under mouse to center of
                                                            viewport

Right Mouse Button  Click - Copy color under pointer to system clipboard

Scroll forward      Zoom in on mouse pointer
Scroll backward     Zoom out on mouse pointer

Ctrl-Arrows         Pan image in 1px increments
Ctrl-Shift-Arrows   Pan image in 10px increments

Ctrl-O              Open File
Ctrl-Shift-O        Refresh internal file list
Ctrl-N, right arrow Open Next file when navigation is available
Ctrl-P, left arrow  Open Previous file when navigation is available
Ctrl-Q              Quit the program

Ctrl +              Zoom in focused on window center
Ctrl -              Zoom out focused on window center
Ctrl-0              Reset Zoom
Ctrl-C              Center Image in window

Ctrl-B              Change Background color

F1                  Open this user manual

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

2. What is this program?

I could not find a lightweight image viewer that would do what I wanted, so
I wrote my own.  This is a simple image viewer designed to help me quickly
and easily view small images in the way I want.  It can open large images as
well, I just designed it more with small images in mind.

While working on a game, I have folders full of image assets that are all
quite small (16x16 and 32x32 pixels).  I want to view them sequentially,
but not at the original 16x16 or 32x32 sizes which are difficult to see
when I am trying to look at detail.  Zooming in with the image viewers I
had took extra steps, slowing me down, and some did pixel interpolation
which makes the enlarged images look fuzzy.  Not desireable.

So my simple image viewer will open an image, make a list of all the other
images in the folder, and zoom in so the image is as large as possible
in the window without making it too large to fit.  It will allow you to
quickly navigate to the next image in the folder (or previous image),
opening and sizing it the same way, so you can quickly scan a folder's
images without manually enlarging each image.

You can pan the image around, zoom in and out, and navigate to the next or
previous image by pressing the left or right arrow keys.

As a bonus, this viewer will give the RGB or Hex values for the pixels in
the image as you mouse over them, and right clicking on a pixel will copy
that pixel's RGB or Hex color to the system clipboard so you can paste it
somewhere easily.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3. How to use this program

My intent was to easily scan through folders full of images, so open an
image and then navigate through the folder with the left and right arrow
keys, or the navigation buttons on either side of the viewport to view
the other images.

---

3.1 Open a file

This image viewer can read the following image formats:
    .png .jpg .jpeg .gif .tif .tiff .bmp .wbmp

An image can be opened in the following ways:

A. Open dialog

    Use the File menu and select Open File, or press Ctrl-O to bring up a
    dialog where you can select a file.

B. Drag 'n Drop

    You can drag an image file onto the JSIV window to open it.

If JSIV cannot open the file, it will give an error message.  If the
reason is available, it will provide the reason.  Otherwise you may
have to verify the file some other way.

Once the file is open, JSIV will center it and size it to be as large
in the window as it can get without any part going out of the window,
and respecting the magnification limits (see 3.3 Image magnification).

JSIV will also display the filename in the program window title bar,
it will display the image size, the Viewport size (the Viewport is
the part of the program window where the image is displayed) and
the current magnification.

When a new image is opened, the window is resized or the image is
magnified, the window title and status bar will update.

---

3.2 Navigate to other files

The main reason for this program's existence is this navigation feature.
When you open a file, JSIV will make a list of all of the other image
files in the folder by matching file extensions - if a file has a .png
extension but is not actually a .png file, JSIV will not know until it
tries to open it.

Once it has this list, it will display a file index in the status bar,

    File: 1 of 20

The first number is which file you are currently viewing and the second is
the total number of files.

When an image is opened via navigation, it will open the same way as if
it was opened with Ctrl-O, File->Open File, or dragging an image file
onto the program window: it will be enlarged and centered, regardless
of the state of the last image you were viewing.

---

3.2.1 Navigate to Previous/Next image

If there are other image files in the same folder as the image currently
displayed, when the mouse moves over the left and right edges of the
viewport (at around half-way between top and bottom), navigation buttons
will appear.  See 5. Viewport

You can left click on the Previous << Image button, press the Left Arrow key,
go to File->Open Previous or press Ctrl-P to navigate to the Previous image
in the list.  If you are currently viewing the first image, navigating to
the previous image will wrap around to view the last image.

You can left click on the Next >> Image button, press the Right Arrow key,
go to File->Open Next or press Ctrl-N to navigate to the Next image in the
list.  If you are currently viewing the last image, navigating to the next
image will wrap around to view the first image.

---

3.2.2 Navigation issues

If there are any issues opening a file while navigating, JSIV will not
interrupt you with a popup error message.  It will instead try to
update it's list of files and move on so you can continue to quickly
navigate through the folder.

3.2.2.1 Only one file in the folder

If there are no other image files in the folder with the image currently
displayed, image navigation will not be available.  JSIV will not move up
or down the folder structure, it will only navigate within one folder at
a time.  In this case, the File index on the Status Bar will show

    File: 1 of 1

To view another image, you will need to Open an image from a different
folder.  See 3.1 Open a file

---

3.2.2.2 No valid image to display

When you open JSIV, it will display the startup image, navigation will not be
available, and the File index on the Status Bar will show

    File: 0 of 0

If an image fails to load and there is no image to fall back to, JSIV will
display the startup image again.

To view an image in this situation, you will need to Open an image as
explained in 3.1 Open a file

---

3.2.2.3 Image will not open or was removed

If an image in the current folder is moved or deleted, or is unable to be
opened for some reason, then trying to navigate to this file will cause
JSIV to remove that file from its list without a popup so you can continue
navigating without interruption.  The File index on the Status bar
will update to reflect the new file count, and navigation will attempt to
move on to the next image file in the list in the direction you are
navigating.  If all of the images except the one currently displayed are
removed from the folder, then navigation will be disabled until a new
file is opened from a folder with more than one image file.

---

3.2.2.4 Current image is removed

If the image currently being displayed is removed from the folder, JSIV will
continue to display it until you navigate away from it or Open a different
file.  If JSIV is able to detect this, it will update the File index on the
Status bar to show

    File: 0 of 20

Showing "File 0" means it is showing an image file that no longer exists in
the folder.

---

3.2.2.5 Refreshing the internal file list

If you are viewing images in a folder and make changes to it, you can use
the Refresh feature (File->Refresh or Ctrl-Shift-O) to have JSIV reindex
the image files so you are not trying to have it open files that no longer
exist.

---

3.3 Image magnification

The other main reason for this image viewer is to easily magnify small
images.

As you zoom in and out, the Status Bar will display the image
magnification.  Zooming in and out are done in powers of 2:
Enlarging an image goes from 100% -> 200% -> 400% -> 800% etc.
Reducing an image goes the other way, and large images can be
reduced to less than 100% magnification: 100%->50%->25%->12%, etc.

---

3.3.1 Zoom In

You can zoom in by scrolling the mouse wheel toward the screen, by
    pressing Ctrl-'+', or with the Menu Image->Zoom In.

Zooming in makes the pixels of the image appear larger.  The maximum zoom
for any image will be when between 8 and 15 full pixels appear in the
program window in either axis.  Fewer than 8 pixels visible does not really
provide any additional meaningful information, so that is the limit.

---

3.3.2 Zoom Out

You can zoom out by scrolling the mouse wheel away from the screen,
    by pressing Ctrl-'-', or with the Menu Image->Zoom Out.

Zooming out makes the pixels of the image appear smaller.  The minimum
zoom for any image will be either 1x (100%) so you can see the pixels
as they actually are, or if the image is too big to fit in the window
at 1x, you can continue zooming out until the entire image is visible.

---

3.3.3 Reset Magnification

You can reset the magnification by pressing Ctrl-0 or in the Menu,
Image->Reset Zoom.

Resetting the magnification will  put it back to what it was when
the image was opened - as large in the window as it can get, with a
power of 2 magnification, without any part of the image outside of
the bounds of the window.

---

3.4 Pan

You can pan the image (move it around) in several ways.  This is most
useful when the image is magnified since the entire image may no longer
fit in the window, but will work at any image size.

Ctrl-Arrow will move the image 1 pixel in the direction of the arrow key.
Ctrl-Shift-Arrow will move the image 10 pixels in that direction.
If the image is magnified, the movement from the arrow keys will be a
full image pixel, so at 800%, Ctrl-Right Arrow will move the image 8
screen pixels to the right, making the image appear to move a full-
enlarged pixel to the right.

---

3.4.1 Drag

Holding the Left Mouse Button down, you can drag the image around within
the window.  If the image is smaller than the window, it will not go past
the edges.  If the image is bigger than the window (including if it is
magnified), the edge of the image will stop at the edge of the window
so there will always be some part of the image in view.

---

3.4.2 Click

Using Ctrl-Left Click, the image will shift so that whatever pixel the
mouse is over will move to the center of the screen.  Essentially, this
centers that pixel on the screen, taking the rest of the image with it.

---

3.4.3 Center

Pressing Ctrl-C will center the entire image in the window.

---

3.5 Background

If the current background color hides some of the pixels of the image,
such as a dark image on a black background, you can change the background
color by pressing Ctrl-B or Menu Color->Change Background.

This will bring up a color chooser that will let you pick a new background
color from one of several methods - swatches, HSL, HSV, RGB/Hex or CMYK.

---

3.6 Color picker

As you move the mouse around, the color of the pixel under the mouse will
appear in the Status Bar at the bottom of the screen.  You can click with
the Right Mouse Button to have the program copy that color to the system
clipboard to paste into another program, document, whatever.  When you
do this, the Status Bar will confirm it was copied by displaying
"Copied!" next to the color value.  That "Copied!" will disappear when
the mouse moves to a different pixel.

In the Color menu, you can choose RGB mode or HEX mode.

RGB mode will display the color as RGB values in the Status Bar, each
between 0-255, and will copy the color in the format it shows.

HEX mode will display the color as a Hex code: 6 hexadecimal digits
that represent the RGB colors: 0xRRGGBB with 0x in front to denote it is
a hexadecimal value.  00 is 0, FF is 255, and everything in between is
from 1-254. So if RGB would show

    R:255 G:0 B:0

then HEX will show

    0xFF0000

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

4. Menu

The Menus include File operations, Image controls, Color settings and
a Help menu.

File (Alt-F)
    Open File (Ctrl-O)              See 3.1
    Open Next (Ctrl-N)              See 3.2
    Open Previous (Ctrl-P)          See 3.2
    Refresh (Ctrl-Shift-O)          See 3.2.2.5

Image (Alt-I)
    Zoom In (Ctrl-'+')              See 3.3.1
    Zoom Out (Ctrl-'-')             See 3.3.2
    Reset Magnification (Ctrl-0)    See 3.3.3
    Center Image (Ctrl-C)           See 3.4.3

Color (Alt-C)
    Change Background Color (Ctrl-B) See 3.5
    Use RGB Mode                    See 3.6
    Use HEX Mode                    See 3.6

Help (Alt-H)
    User Manual (F1)                This document
    About

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

5. Viewport

The Viewport is the largest part of the program window where the images you
view will be displayed.  It will initially be a Black background, but you
can change it in the Color Menu Color->Change Background Color (or Ctrl-B).
See 3.5 Background

On startup, the Viewport will display a startup image.  You can move this
image around and magnify it like any other image, but it is just meant to
confirm that the program has successfully started.

When an image is open from a folder with other images, hovering over the
left or right side of the Viewport (a few screen pixels in from the edges
and about half-way between the top and bottom), navigation buttons will
appear.  You can Left Click those to navigate to the previous or next
image without having to use the keyboard commands.  These buttons only
appear when the mouse is hovering over them so that they do not obscure
an image if part of the image is in that area.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

6. Status bar

The bottom of the program window is the Status Bar that shows information
about the image currently being displayed, and about the program.

---

File Index:

This starts out showing

    File: 0 of 0

while the splash screen is displayed.  Once an image is loaded, it will
change to show the current file index.  See also 3.2 Navigate to other files

---

Image Size:

This shows the original image size in pixels, ignoring any magnification.

---

Viewport:

This shows the size of the Viewport in pixels so you can get an idea of
how large the image will be compared to a given window size by adjusting
the size of the program window.

---

Zoom:

This shows the current magnification as a percentage - 100% is 1x so the
image will appear at the size that Image Size shows.  200% is double the
size, 400% is 4x the size, etc.

---

R:## G:## B:##
-OR-
0x######

This shows both the color of the pixel the mouse is hovering over, and
the mode so you can see at a glance what will be copied to the system
clipboard if you right click.

--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

7. About

This program was written entirely by me, Jayde Dragyn.

Questions, contact me at JaydeDragyn@outlook.com

You can find the source code on GitHub at:

    https://github.com/JaydeDragyn/jsiv

This program was built using Java 17.0.4.1 2022-08-18 LTS
No IDE, just a text editor (Kate) and a git bash terminal.
The startup image and navigation buttons are drawn by the
program using Java's Graphics2D class.

Technical guidance, proofreading, and code review assistance by:
    ChatGPT (OpenAI) and Claude Sonnet (Anthropic)
